# Permutation Groups

*Definition*: Let $X$ be a *set*, which can either be finite or infinite.

- **Permutation**: a *bijection* from $X$ to *itself*.

- **Symmetric group** $\Sym(X)$: the group consisting of all permutations of $X$.

    - **Symmetric group** $S_N$: the permutation group of the set of first $N$ positive integers ($X = \{1,...,N\}$), containing $N!$ elements.

        Obviously $\Sym(X)$ of any finite set $X$ of $N$ elements is isomorphic to $S_N$, since we can label elements in $X$ from $1$ to $N$.

- **Permutation groups** of $X$: *subgroups* of $\Sym(X)$

## Orbit and Stabilizer

The results of permutations can be described by the concepts of orbit and stabilizers.

*Definition*: Let $X$ be a non-empty set, and $G \le \Sym(X)$.

- **$G$-equivalence**: an equivalence relation: for $x, y \in X$

    $$
    x \sim y \ \Leftrightarrow \exists \pi \in G, \ \pi(x) = y 
    $$

- **$G$-orbit**: equivalence class based on the $G$-equivalence relation. The class represented by $x \in X$ is the set of all permutation results of $x$, denoted by

    $$
    \Orb_G(x) = \{\pi(x) \mid \pi \in G\}
    $$

In addition, let $x \in X$, $Y \subset X$ (assume $Y$ is non-empty).

- **Stabilizer** of element $x$ (or set $Y$) in $G$: <br>
    the set of permutations in $G$ that *fixes* $x$ (or *fixes every element* in $Y$, denoted by

    $$
    \begin{align*}
        \St_G(x) &= \{\pi \in G \mid \pi(x) = x\}
        \\
        \St_G(Y) &= \{\pi \in G \mid \forall y \in Y,\ \pi(y) = y\}
    \end{align*}
    $$

## Special Permutation Groups

*Definition*: Assume $X$ is non-empty. We assign names for subgroups $G$ of $\Sym(X)$ with special properties.

$$
\begin{array}{c|c}
    \text{Name} & \text{Description}
    \\[4pt] \hline \\[-6pt]
    \text{Transitive} &
    \begin{aligned}
        \forall x, y &\in X \\ \exists \pi &\in G
    \end{aligned} \quad 
    y = \pi(x)
    \\[6pt] \hline \\[-6pt]
    \text{Faithful} & 
    \begin{aligned}
        \forall \pi_1,\pi_2 &\in G \\ \exists x &\in X
    \end{aligned} \quad 
    \pi_1 \ne \pi_2 \Rightarrow \pi_1(x) \ne \pi_2(x)
    \\[6pt] \hline \\[-6pt]
    \begin{gathered}
        \text{Free} \\[-3pt] \text{(Semi-regular)}
    \end{gathered} & 
    \forall x \in X, \ \St_G(x) = 1
    \\[6pt] \hline \\[-6pt]
    \text{Regular} &
    \text{Both transitive and free}
\end{array}
$$

<div class="result">

*Theorem*: Let $G \le \Sym(X)$.

- $G$ is transitive $\Leftrightarrow$ There is *exactly one* $G$-orbit ($X$ itself).
    
</div><br>

## Structure of $\Sym(X)$ of Finite Sets

### Generators ("Basic Permutations")

The elements in $S_N$ are denoted by the **cyclic notation**. For example

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 \\
    2 & 3 & 1 & 4 & 6 & 5
\end{pmatrix} = (123)(56)
$$

Some special permutations in $S_N$ are:

- **Cyclic permutation** of length $k$, or **$k$-cycle**: $(a_1...a_k)$ (containing only one pair of brackets)

- **Transposition**: a 2-cycle $(a_1 a_2)$

<div class="result">

*Theorem*: $S_N$ can be generated by either of the following:

- The set of all transpositions
- The set $\{(12),...,(1N)\}$
- The set $\{(12),(23),...,(N-1,N)\}$
- The set $\{(12),(12...N)\}$

</div><br>

### Even and Odd Permutations

