# Abelian (Commutative) Groups

*Definition*:

- **Abelian (commutative) group**: A group $G$ in which *all elements commute*.

    $$
    ab = ba \quad \forall a,b \in G
    $$

*Notation notes*: For Abelian groups, we often use additive notation instead of the usual multiplicative notation.

$$
\begin{array}{c|c}
    \text{Multiplicative} & \text{Additive}
    \\[3pt] \hline \\[-6pt]
    1 & 0 
    \\[4pt]
    g^{-1} & -g 
    \\[4pt]
    g_1 g_2 & g_1 + g_2
    \\[4pt]
    g_1 g_2^{-1} & g_1 - g_2
    \\[4pt]
    g^n & ng
\end{array}
$$

## Cyclic Groups

The simplest Abelian groups are the cyclic groups.

*Definition*: 

- **Cyclic group**: Abelian group $G$ generated by only *one* element $x$ (called its **generator**)
    
    $$
    G = \{0, \pm x, \pm 2x, ...\} \equiv \expect{x}
    $$

    - **Infinite cyclic group**: if $N x = 0$ can only be satisfied by $N = 0$, the cyclic group will contain an infinite number of elements. 

    - **Finite cyclic group**: if the orders of all generator are all finite, the cyclic group will contain a finite number of elements. 

The most familiar cyclic groups are $\Z$ (under addition) and $\Z_N$ (under addition modulo $N$). In fact, all cyclic groups are isomorphic to them.

<div class="result">

*Theorem*: (On cyclic groups)

- Infinite cyclic groups are isomorphic to $\Z$.
- Finite cyclic groups generated by one order-$N$ generator are isomorphic to $\Z_N$.

</div><br>

## Finitely Generated Abelian Groups

Next we generalize to the case with multiple generators.

*Definition*:

- **Finitely generated Abelian group**: An *Abelian* group $G$ *generated* by a *finite* number of its elements $x_1, ..., x_r$ according to the formula

    $$
    n_1 x_1 + \cdots + n_r x_r ,\quad 
    x_i \in G, n_i \in \Z, 1 \le i \le r
    $$

- **Generator of group $G$**: The elements $x_1, ..., x_r$.

<div class="remark">

*Remark*: In any group $G$, we can always pick out commuting elements (at least we have the identity and any other one element) and construct an Abelian subgroup $H$ of $G$.

</div><br>

### Free Abelian Groups

*Definition*:

- **Linearly independent generators**: If the identity 0 can only be generated by setting $n_1 = \cdots = n_r = 0$, i.e.

    $$
    n_1 x_1 + \cdots + n_r x_r = 0 
    \Leftrightarrow
    n_1 = \cdots = n_r = 0
    $$

    the $r$ generators are then said to be linearly independent.

- **Free Abelian group**: Abelian groups finitely generated by *linearly independent generators*.
    
    - **Rank**: number of linearly independent generators of a free Abelian group


### Relation to Cyclic Groups

A finitely generated abelian group can also be related to the cyclic groups $\Z, \Z_n$ by the following theorem.

<div class="result">

*Theorem*: (Fundamental theorem of finitely generated Abelian groups)

Let $G$ be a finitely generated Abelian group with $m$ generators. Then $G$ is (isomorphic to) a direct sum (in additive notation) of $m$ cyclic groups:

$$
G \cong 
\Z^r \oplus \Z_{k_1} \oplus \cdots \oplus \Z_{k_p}, \quad
\Z^r \equiv \underbrace{\Z \oplus \cdots \oplus \Z}_r
$$

where $r \ge 0, m = r + p$. 

</div>

----

*Proof*:

----

<div class="remark">

*Remark*: 

- $r$ is called the **rank** of the group $G$
- We can further prove that $k_1, ..., k_p$ are powers of (not necessarily distinct) *prime numbers*.
  
<div>
